

Shlomi2011 - Warburg effect, metabolic model

Using a genome-scale human metabolic network model accounting for
stoichiometric and enzyme solvent capacity considerations, this model shows
that the Warburg effect (a classical hallmark of cancer metabolism) is a
direct consequence of the metabolic adaptation of cancer cells to increase
biomass production rate.

This model is described in the article:

[Genome-scale metabolic modeling elucidates the role of proliferative
adaptation in causing the Warburg
effect.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/21423717)

Shlomi T, Benyamini T, Gottlieb E, Sharan R, Ruppin E

PLoS Computational Biology. 2011; 7(3):e1002018

Abstract:

The Warburg effect - a classical hallmark of cancer metabolism - is a counter-
intuitive phenomenon in which rapidly proliferating cancer cells resort to
inefficient ATP production via glycolysis leading to lactate secretion,
instead of relying primarily on more efficient energy production through
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, as most normal cells do. The causes
for the Warburg effect have remained a subject of considerable controversy
since its discovery over 80 years ago, with several competing hypotheses.
Here, utilizing a genome-scale human metabolic network model accounting for
stoichiometric and enzyme solvent capacity considerations, we show that the
Warburg effect is a direct consequence of the metabolic adaptation of cancer
cells to increase biomass production rate. The analysis is shown to accurately
capture a three phase metabolic behavior that is observed experimentally
during oncogenic progression, as well as a prominent characteristic of cancer
cells involving their preference for glutamine uptake over other amino acids.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1105100000](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1105100000) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

